This is the first of a series of videos attempting to open-source Diversity & Inclusion material. The first topic we will be covering is Identity. This topic serves as a great 
starting point for organizations looking to begin Diversity & Inclusion programs. It also serves as a great primer for newly hired employees to build on the progress your organization 
has made and for current employees to not get caught off guard if you choose to engage in a higher risk exercise (we will explore that idea a little further towards the end of the 
video).



The jumping point of any conversation around Diversity is that although we are all humans, each of us is different in our own ways. Having a common language, vision, and community 
aids us in understanding & bridging the gap between our differences. We begin with the definition of Identity. As a facilitator, you may ask participants what they think Identity is. 
When I facilitate, I try not to ask rhetorical questions, even if that means we get a couple of seconds of comfortable or uncomfortable silence. After a great answer, or a couple of 
short ones from the participants, I hit them with the good old Oxford Definition which defines it as:



Identity: The fact of being who or what a person or thing is.



To further digest Identity, Highland Solutions uses an Identity Wheel to broaden the scope of what encompasses individual and group identities. Most people can easily grasp the idea 
of apparent identities. These are things like gender, skin pigment, race, nationality/language/accent or visible disability. What we achieve by looking at an Identity Wheel is to think 
about non-apparent aspects of diversity. These include things like learning disabilities, family relationships, hobbies, habits, employment history, sexual orientation, and significant 
experiences. While apparent aspects of Diversity are the ones dominating the conversation, it is important to include non-apparent aspects in the mix to provide visibility and 
validity to people carrying such identities. Most importantly, considering all aspects of identity ensures that there is a place for everyone to be part of the conversation.

Take about 5 minutes for the room to reflect on their own Identity Wheel. Then, ask the room for initial thoughts or reactions. Most commonly, participants are able to understand the 
importance of non-apparent aspects of identity. One of the greatest responses from your audience is the realization that Diversity is a topic that everyone is involved in. Sometimes, 
individuals can feel intimidated or defensive when talking about Diversity because they may come from a place of privilege or simply because they are part of the national cultural 
majority. As Americans in the U.S., our cultural and social norms are the standard and it’s a special environment because of the “melting pot” we are known for. This can make some 
individuals believe that they are not diverse since a lot of peers live with similar American values, however, if we take the time to step back, we could realize that American culture 
is vastly diverse extending past cowboys and apple pie. Some contemporary conversations focus on the indignant or institutionalized aspects of Diversity. Framing Diversity through the 
lens of Identity can remove some of the apprehension people feel around the topic and perhaps serve as a step towards improving diversity relations as we help others’ realize that 
there is a place for everyone in the discussion.



We end the exercise by tying our differences to common goals and operations. The differences that we have from one another makes us stronger as an organization since they facilitate 
creativity, problem solving, communication, and cross-cultural competencies. For example, Highland Solutions is a UX-centered, technology-driven solutions company. As employees, we 
have come together to solve problems and make an income for the organization. However, as individuals supporting the Highland Solutions mission, we leverage our differences and 
strengths to impact the way that we do work. Our employment backgrounds, education, personalities, beliefs, preferences, and motivations all drive our day-to-day operations and 
enables us to better communicate, support, and challenge each other. In turn, our companies’ principles of Putting People First, Giving a Damn, Being Curious and Showing Transparency 
shine through.



And there you have it. Thank you for watching and let us know how this workshop works for your team